USDA awards $56M to support research on SARS-CoV-2 in animals, SARS-CoV-2 remains a threat to both humans and animals, which is why researchers continue to study its spread and how it works. Doing so could also be instructive for how to handle other emerging diseases. That’s why the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) has awarded 36 grants totaling more than $56 million to research projects taking a One Health approach to studying SARS-CoV-2 in animal populations, according to a . APHIS and its partners are conducting projects that contribute toward the agency’s strategic framework for surveillance of animals for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. This includes projects to understand how SARS-CoV-2 virus behaves in different animals, how it moves between animals and people, and what can be done to interrupt the chain of disease transmission. Long term, these projects will help APHIS build a national capacity to prevent or limit the next zoonotic disease outbreak, according to the announcement. Some preliminary results have already emerged from funded projects. Earlier this year, from its first year of studies and sampling of white-tailed deer for active infection of SARS-CoV-2. These studies show that SARS-CoV-2 is likely to have spread widely within the U.S. white-tailed deer population. Additionally, the research shows that SARS-CoV-2 was transmitted from humans to deer, mutated, and was potentially transmitted back to humans. This research is helping us understand if cervids, such as white-tailed deer, are acting as a host or reservoir species. In another study, APHIS wildlife disease specialists collaborated with University of Missouri researchers to capture and sample rats in fall 2021 in and around the New York City sewage system. Their findings show that 13 of 79 wild rats (16.5%) tested positive for exposure to SARS-CoV-2. The authors note that this data suggests “rats may have been exposed to the virus through unknown fomites, e.g. those contaminated with human food wastes”, although no evidence has shown that SARS-CoV-2 viruses in sewage water is infectious. The results suggest the need for further monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 in those populations. Other projects include eight by the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) Agriculture and Food Research Initiative (AFRI), one by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases (EEID) program, and 27 other projects. These projects range from monitoring cervid health on Sauk-Suiattle Indian tribal lands in Washington state to SARS-CoV-2 surveillance in imported domestic animals entering Los Angeles International Airport to studying the mechanism underlying susceptibility or resistance of animal species to SARS-CoV-2. “APHIS has long relied on collaboration with our state, tribal, federal, and private partners to help protect our nation’s agricultural and natural resources,” APHIS Acting Administrator Dr. Michael Watson said in the statement. “We are excited about the opportunity these new partnerships give us to build critical One Health coordination and capacity while furthering the science on SARS-CoV-2. This important work will strengthen our foundation to protect humans and animals for years to come.” The One Health concept recognizes that the health of people, animals, and the environment are linked. APHIS is currently conducting multiple projects related to One Health, including those aimed at understanding how the SARS-CoV-2 virus behaves in different animals, how it moves between animals and people, and how to interrupt the chain of transmission. Every issue of and includes , a feature in which key opinion leaders weigh in on timely topics affecting animal, human, and environmental health. Visit the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service website for a .
NIFA, LifeStock partner to promote federal programs addressing veterinary shortages, In rural areas of the country, the U.S. is facing a shortfall of veterinarians to treat livestock and poultry. In fact, only 3-4% of new veterinary graduates have entered food animal–related practice over the past 20 years, according to a report issued earlier this year. Comparatively, about 40% of graduates specialized in this area about 40 years ago. The report, “ ” was commissioned by the Farm Journal Foundation and authored by Clinton Neill, PhD, who was an assistant professor in veterinary economics for Cornell University’s Center of Veterinary Business and Entrepreneurship. He is now a senior economist and associate director of strategic business research and outreach at the AVMA. The paper’s findings indicate that more than 500 counties across the U.S. have shortages of food animal veterinarians. Shortages stem from several factors, including high levels of educational debt that have outpaced potential earnings, especially in the rural U.S. The AVMA is committed to bringing awareness of rural shortages. To address this issue, the Association is urging Congress to pass the Rural Veterinary Workforce Act. Previously named the Veterinary Medicine Loan Repayment Program Enhancement Act, the bill would help increase access to food animal and public health veterinary services in U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)-designated rural areas by helping veterinarians with the obstacle of educational debt ( sidebar). Meanwhile, the USDA’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) has awarded over $111,000 to the nonprofit LifeStock International to promote two NIFA programs offering educational debt relief to veterinarians who commit to working in designated rural veterinary shortage areas, especially areas where food animal veterinary services are in short supply. Over the next year, LifeStock will visit approximately a dozen U.S. veterinary colleges and four major animal health meetings to raise awareness about NIFA’s (VMLRP) and the (VSGP), according . The two NIFA programs are meant to ensure that veterinarians can provide essential food animal and public health medicine in USDA-designated veterinary shortage situations around the country. In 2023, the USDA declared , which is more than any year to date. Since 2010, the USDA awarded 795 VMLRP awards to veterinarians. Rural veterinary medicine is a struggling endeavor in the United States, according to Dr. Corrie Brown, founder and executive director of LifeStock, which works in developing countries to improve the livelihoods of livestock holders. Many current food animal practitioners are approaching retirement, potentially leaving huge gaps in keeping national herds and flocks safe from disease, added Dr. Brown, a professor emeritus at the University of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine. “LifeStock’s message is: We know that food animal medicine may not offer the immediate financial rewards of pet animal medicine, but if food animal practice is where your heart is, NIFA is there to financially support you in a rural practice with a huge boost in loan repayment,” she said. LifeStock is also offering subject matter experts to provide mentorship, training, and guidance to potential VMLRP and VSGP applicants through online remote support. NIFA awarded the yearlong grant to LifeStock in August with the goal of enhancing the visibility of the VMLRP and VSGP and easing the application process. “A very big part of the LifeStock support function is to help those who are writing grants to these programs so that they can succeed and form the next generation of food animal practitioners, ensuring our national agricultural economy and food safety,” Dr. Brown said. Authorized by Congress in 2003, the VMLRP helps qualified veterinarians by paying up to $25,000 per year towards repayment of educational loans in return for their service in certain high-priority food animal veterinary shortage areas. NIFA paid nearly $9 million in 2022 to 89 veterinarians through the VMLRP. The awards were for 73 new VMLRP applicants and 16 program renewals, according to a NIFA report. Most new program awardees (78%) and half of renewal awardees had over $100,000 in educational loan debt. Of those, nearly 47% carried a debt load exceeding $150,000, the report stated. The VSGP was established in the 2014 Farm Bill to fill gaps not fully met by VMLRP by offering grants for education, extension, and training (EET) and rural practice enhancement (RPE). Eligible applicants include universities, veterinary clinics operating in rural areas, veterinary associations, and state, local, or tribal agencies. In 2022, NIFA awarded 12 grants for rural practice enhancement and eight grants for education, extension, and training. Congress appropriated $4 million to fund the VSGP for the federal fiscal year 2023. Ultimately, both NIFA and LifeStock want to see better and more expanded animal health care delivery in the rural United States, leading to improved economics for producers and better protection against incursions of transboundary animal diseases, as well as enhanced food security for the nation. State animal health officials have from October 2 to November 13 to to be designated as USDA veterinary shortage areas for next year. These shortage situation areas will be posted online February 2024. After months of collaborative work by the AVMA, other stakeholder organizations, and congressional offices, the Rural Veterinary Workforce Act (S 2829/ HR 4355), formerly known as the Veterinary Medicine Loan Repayment Program (VMLRP) Enhancement Act, was reintroduced in both the House and Senate on September 18. The bipartisan legislation would end the current 39% federal withholding tax on the educational loan repayment awards the program offers. These awards can total up to $75,000 over three years in exchange for veterinarians serving in U.S. Department of Agriculture–designated shortage areas. If passed, it would make the tax treatment of the awards the same as for the analogous program for physicians and other human health care providers. “Increasing veterinary services in high-priority rural areas through the Rural Veterinary Workforce Act would help keep the nation’s livestock healthy and our food supply safe and secure, and protect public health,” said AVMA President Dr. Rena Carlson . In the previous 117th Congress, the VMLRP Enhancement Act received its highest level of congressional support with 89 cosponsors. Senators Debbie Stabenow, a Democrat from Michigan, and Mike Crapo, a Republican from Idaho, and Representatives Adrian Smith, a Republican from Nebraska, and John Larson, a Democrat from Connecticut, reintroduced the Rural Veterinary Workforce Act. Senators Cindy Hyde-Smith, a Republican from Mississippi, and Amy Klobuchar, a Democrat from Minnesota, co-chairs of the first-ever Senate Veterinary Medicine Caucus, are among the cosponsors of the bill. More information on how to apply for the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture’s and the is available on NIFA’s website.
Bill seeks to strengthen US foreign animal disease response, A bipartisan group of U.S. representatives and senators has introduced legislation that would strengthen federal programs combating destructive foreign animal diseases (FAD) that threaten U.S. livestock. Introduced in the U.S. House and Senate on May 19, the Foreign Animal Disease Prevention, Surveillance, and Rapid Response Act of 2023 (H.R. 3419/S. 1666) would reauthorize and increase annual appropriations for the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) National Animal Disease Preparedness and Response Program (NADPRP) to $70 million and National Animal Vaccine and Veterinary Countermeasures Bank (NAVVCB) to $150 million. Additionally, the bill would raise the annual budget for the National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) to $45 million. "The preventative investments made through this bill will ensure the U.S. Department of Agriculture is able to safeguard our agricultural supply chain and mitigate the effects of foreign animal diseases, if, and when an outbreak occurs in the U.S., rather than playing catch-up after the fact," House bill sponsor Rep. Ronny Jackson, who represents Texas's 13th Congressional District, . Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar, sponsor of the Senate version of the bill, said in a statement, "When animal disease outbreaks hit, the impact is felt by farmers, rural communities, and our entire food supply chain. That's why I worked with Senator (John) Cornyn to ensure that animal disease preparedness would be part of the 2018 Farm Bill." The 2018 Farm Bill created new animal health programs to bolster the USDA's response to foreign animal diseases. The act established the NADPRP and the NAVVCB and increased funding for the NAHLN. The NADPRP implements projects that enhance prevention, preparedness, detection, and response to emerging FADs; the NAVVCB allows the USDA to stockpile animal vaccine and foreign animal disease diagnostic test kits to use in the event of an FAD outbreak; and the NAHLN is a network of 60 federal, state, and university animal health laboratories that provide animal health diagnostic testing to surveil and detect biological threats. Numerous livestock and veterinary associations have signaled their support for the legislation, including the AVMA. "The proposed legislation would allocate the appropriate resources to the National Animal Health Laboratory Network and other federal programs that are essential in protecting food security and public health through the ability to respond to high-consequence animal disease events," AVMA President Lori Teller said in a press release. "The AVMA supports this bill," Dr. Teller continued, "and we urge Congress to provide this necessary protection for our country through the bipartisan Foreign Animal Disease Prevention, Surveillance, and Rapid Response Act of 2023." This year, NADPRP funding supported projects focused on enhancing prevention, preparedness, detection, and response activities for the most damaging diseases that threaten U.S. livestock. Some of the projects funded included targeted learning modules for the poultry industry on highly pathogenic avian influenza at the University of Minnesota and extending a between-farm model of transmission of African swine fever to estimate the necessary number of sample collectors in a highly swine-dense region at North Carolina State University.
APHIS funds animal disease programs, The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service on Dec. 1 announced the awarding of $14.4 million to fund 76 projects being undertaken by states, universities, and other organizations to bolster programs protecting animal health. The 2018 farm bill appropriated millions of dollars for programs to help prevent animal pests and diseases from entering the United States and reduce the spread and impact of potential disease incursions. It is the second year APHIS has provided funding from the $867 billion farm bill. In 2019, the agency awarded $10.2 million that funded 44 projects. The latest round of funding supports projects focused on increasing practical livestock biosecurity measures or advancing rapid depopulation and disposal methods to be used during high-consequence animal disease outbreaks. It also supports projects enhancing early detection of high-consequence animal diseases and improving emergency response capabilities at National Animal Health Laboratory Network veterinary diagnostic laboratories. APHIS awarded $9.3 million through the National Animal Disease Preparedness and Response Program. The 46 NADPRP-funded projects address critical livestock biosecurity and large-scale depopulation and carcass disposal concerns in all major livestock industries across all regions of the United States. These projects will be led by animal health authorities in 16 states, at 14 land-grant universities, and with two organizations. For instance, the American Association of Swine Veterinarians received $86,752 to systematically gather information from the swine industry’s recent experience with depopulation resulting from COVID-19 market disruptions and compile it into useful new resources for swine veterinarians and farmers to improve capabilities and capacities for responding to future emergency events. The AASV project will deliver specific recommendations on methods for practical on-farm depopulation, decision-making tools, equipment lists, record-keeping forms, and training and debriefing tools to help veterinarians and farmers manage depopulation events. Another program, run by the University of California-Davis, was awarded $397,409 to address known disease risk factors and prevention gaps in veterinary services provided to small-scale farms and high-risk alternative agriculture systems, including those in urban areas, in California, Colorado, Oregon, and Washington state, by improving access to and delivery of biosecurity information. The project includes analyzing key prevention gaps, developing educational tools, and building capacity through train-the-trainer tools and resources on biosecurity. APHIS awarded $5.1 million through the National Animal Health Laboratory Network to 30 projects led by network laboratories in 21 states. The projects will help NAHLN enhance early detection of high-consequence animal diseases and improve emergency response capabilities at NAHLN veterinary diagnostic laboratories. Several projects include improving diagnostic testing for high-concern diseases, including African swine fever, classical swine fever, foot-and-mouth disease, and avian influenza. The University of Missouri’s Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory, for instance, received $116,323 for a project to validate an ASR1 peptoids–based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for detection of low levels of the prions that cause chronic wasting disease in samples from live and dead animals. The intent is to provide a new diagnostic method that uses saliva samples and has an improved sensitivity over the current ELISA for detecting CWD. This method could also be used with environmental samples, which could be useful for regulatory officials when screening cervid farms. Full lists of awarded (PDF) and (PDF) projects are available.
Foreign animal disease laboratory, The AVMA actively seeks continued adequate congressional funding for the functional maintenance and uninterrupted operation of the United States' foreign animal disease research and diagnostic laboratory facility at Plum Island prior to the opening of the National Bio and Agro-Defense Facility (NBAF). Congress should appropriate adequate funding to the agency operating the NBAF for operations and ongoing maintenance as well as for a robust foreign animal disease research and diagnostics program.
Animal disease researchers honored, 
11 technologies veterinary practices can adopt today, By These are exciting times when it comes to advancements in veterinary medicine. An explosion in new technologies, coupled with improvements in longer-standing ones, means that busy veterinary teams have valuable help when it comes to delivering high-quality patient care, reaching more patients, and establishing strong client relationships. New devices and software promise to help enhance patient care and monitoring, ease workloads, improve workflows, meet or exceed client expectations, and more. Some technologies offer a suite of useful features. Here is an overview of 11 technologies or technologic features that can give your practice an essential leg up, freeing staff to focus on what only they can do. The best system for a particular practice depends on a variety of factors, including affordability, customizability, the quality and reliability of internet connectivity, and the practice’s specific needs. Basic PIMS may involve software installation on practice computers that are connected via a shared server or database where records are stored. Alternatively, a practice may use the services of a cloud provider, enabling the system to be easily accessed and updated from various devices. When used as intended, PIMS can standardize and enhance record keeping, reduce recording errors, boost operational efficiency and revenue, enable measurement and improvement of business and patient metrics, bolster veterinary team engagement, improve patient outcomes and client satisfaction, and more. The breadth of available features may surprise you. PIMS platforms may offer some or all of these capabilities: To get started, all you need is a solid understanding of the , which services would best serve your practice and clientele, what technology those services will require, and which tools are available to assist. For example, tools such as email, text messaging, and video call applications can be used to efficiently communicate across practice teams and with clients. The same goes for primary care veterinarians connecting with providers of specialized services for real-time support, which has the added bonus of allowing rapid sharing of medical records, high-quality radiologic images, and other test results. For video calls, practices need devices with large enough screens to see patients clearly, a space free of background noise and distractions, and adequate internet speed on both ends of the call. For other types of communication, clients may need to attach videos, high-resolution images, or detailed records. In all cases, it’s important to make sure that such interactions are recorded in the patient’s medical record and that communication systems are secure and adequately protect client confidentiality. Veterinarians can provide telehealth using technologies that may already exist in their practice, such as smartphones and general audio and videoconferencing platforms. More sophisticated telehealth software options or platforms are available that integrate well with—or are already included in— PIMS platforms. Features to look for include live video appointments, two-way messaging, and the ability to archive messages and video appointments. Seek features that allow automatic tracking, billing, and collecting payment on sessions. By providing telehealth services, practices also are able to charge for their time and knowledge in situations that previously went uncompensated, and they’re able to keep clients who might otherwise turn to direct-to-consumer veterinary telehealth companies for their perceived convenience. To learn more about telehealth and how to get going, check out . Going a step further, some online scheduling systems allow veterinary practices to create a waitlist to backfill last-minute openings and cancellations. When an opening occurs, the system immediately alerts the first person on the list via group email or SMS message. The benefits can justify the initial investment in time and money. Cancelations and no-show appointments can tax revenue and productivity. Online scheduling systems support maximum fill of available appointment slots, help reduce phone calls, eliminate double bookings, and allow reception staff to concentrate on clients in the waiting room or on the phone. : Social media has become a critical means for veterinary practices to attract and retain clients and to foster a great reputation. But doing this well requires constant monitoring and responding to comments, posting new content, and measuring your success. Various technologies are available to assist. Some technologies help with soliciting and managing client feedback by automatically inviting clients via email or text to comment on their experience following their appointment. This allows practices to discover proactively things their clients did or didn’t like, and the chance to directly contact unhappy clients. Once feedback is submitted, clients can be automatically invited to post a review on selected review platforms. For those who would like to post more on social media, but just don’t have the time, there are social media management platforms that allow scheduling of posts ahead of time on the networks of your choice. Most of these technologies also allow monitoring of trends, to gauge the impact of your efforts. Paper-based controlled substance logs have long been the standard. But these tracking sheets can be lost, mishandled, or ruined. Plus, they are prone to gaps in entries, whether due to someone waiting until the end of the day to write everything down or simply forgetting to do so. Cloud-based controlled drug tracking platforms aim to help veterinary teams more easily, accurately, and efficiently manage their controlled drug inventory, in compliance with applicable laws. These platforms allow users to record, retrieve, and produce reports on up-to-date information anywhere they are, reducing time spent on manual daily line entries, stock counts, and reconciliations. Several are designed specifically for veterinary practices. Additional features vary. Some platforms let teams scan the coded drug label with a smartphone to immediately log the drug, tracking even the GPS location of all activity. Others may include integration with PIMS, including automatic checking of platform entries against PIMS records to eliminate double entries. A multifunctional example is digital platforms that employ an AI chat-bot to streamline workflows and help manage client communications. Such platforms offer automated features to assist clients in activities such as booking appointments, getting answers to common questions, messaging with the veterinary team, or refilling prescriptions. They can also help the team by collecting patient histories before appointments and follow-up information after appointments, or providing automated, custom responses to online reviews. Note that team members are still needed to assist and review AI-generated responses to ensure accuracy as the technology continues to develop. Another useful tool is AI-based dictation software. For example, rather than waiting until the end of the workday to record their examination findings, veterinarians can recite them as they go, and have the software simultaneously record them in the appropriate record. Again, it is important to review the generated record for accuracy. And it seems we’re just getting started. Examples of other potential applications to detect, predict, and classify disease include AI analysis of photographs, videos, pathology slides, or wearable technologies data. As such applications are adopted, it’s important to consider the patient populations on which they were originally based, and whether those populations are similar to those for which the applications will be used. It's also important that veterinarians use AI-based diagnostic tools as supplements—not replacements—to their own diagnostic workups and interpretations. Like other diagnostic tests, these tools may yield false-positive or false-negative results. For use in the field, portable digital radiography units share these advantages, with the added bonus of being easier to transport and carry. To date, there have been reports of 3D printing being used in the development of custom prosthetics, orthotics, and implants for animals. The process has been used for everything from replacing a in a dog to creating a for a Great Hornbill. In addition to the obvious benefit to patients, creating 3D replicas of the body parts of specific patients can aid planning and preparation for complex surgeries, potentially resulting in shorter surgery times and better outcomes. Before these innovations, creating implants and prosthetics for animals had been expensive and time consuming. But 3D printing makes it easier, cheaper, and faster to design these devices, which also fit better. That’s because the scanning software takes highly accurate measurements, models the design, and builds from there. The good news is you don’t need to buy a 3D printer or learn how to use it. Multiple companies provide these services, working with veterinarians to design custom products specific to their patients’ needs. And 3D printing isn’t limited to implants and prosthetics. Other offerings include surgical incision guides, scaffolds for bone replacement and tissue engineering, customized surgical instruments, and more—in various types of medical-grade materials. Medical uses of smartphones, smartwatches, and related applications—most designed for humans—have been investigated in several animal species for everything from ECG to gait analysis, with mixed results. As demand for veterinary uses increases, so may the accuracy and reliability of these applications. Keep in mind that the Food and Drug Administration does not require premarket approval for medical devices intended for solely animal use and leaves the responsibility for assuring the devices are safe and effective to the manufacturer or distributor. In production medicine, wireless biosensor technology by providing behavioral and physiological data—such as time spent eating, ruminating, lying, and standing—for individual animals. This information can then be aggregated and used to monitor herd health. In small animal health, various wearable technologies are available, with capabilities extending far beyond the Holter monitors traditionally used to record ECG activity. Features vary by product, and may include continuous, noninvasive monitoring of vital parameters; activity level (including sleeping habits); or certain behaviors like shaking, scratching, or food consumption. These devices may take the form of a collar, collar attachment, or halter. They may be intended primarily for owners (e.g., to alert them when veterinary care may be needed) or for veterinarians (e.g., to monitor response to treatment). They may pair wirelessly with a mobile app, web platform, or data cloud service. Plus, some wearable devices can be used along with other connected tools like pet feeders to gain a more comprehensive assessment of an animal’s health status, including feed intake. are becoming increasingly affordable and accessible, but still have some hurdles to overcome. If veterinarians are to rely on them for diagnostic purposes, the devices need to be evaluated for accuracy and reliability in the species of intended use. Further, ideally the acquired data would be importable to or integrated with veterinary practice management software.
AVMA CEO addresses workforce trends, The profession is now seeing demand for veterinary services begin to normalize, according to . “That means clinic visits, new patients, and new clients appear to be gradually returning to prepandemic levels with evidence of growth in demand that is more in line with what we have seen in the past,” said Dr. Janet Donlin, AVMA CEO. She recently spoke during the KC Animal Health Corridor’s 18th annual Animal Health Summit (AHS), held August 26-27 in Kansas City, Missouri. She was part of a panel of veterinary leaders invited by summit host KC Animal Health Corridor to speak about trends within veterinary medicine. Her co-panelists were Drs. Karen Felsted, founder of PantheraT Veterinary Management Consulting; Carolyn Henry, professor and former dean of the University of Missouri College of Veterinary Medicine; and Matt Peuser, owner of Advanced Veterinary Care of Olathe, Kansas. Acknowledging that some areas of the profession are experiencing workforce shortfalls, she said some of the short-term solutions the AVMA has identified can help address these situations, including focusing on retaining staff, incorporating innovative technology into practice, and effectively engaging the full skill sets of all team members, especially veterinary technicians, veterinary technologists, and veterinary technician specialists. Erroneous estimates for the number of companion animal veterinarians needed in 2030 “substantially” overestimate demand and underestimate supply, Dr. Donlin told the audience. These estimates, she said, are based on faulty math and are being used to justify proposed long-term changes to the profession that, in AVMA’s opinion, threaten animal health and safety. Proposals include introducing a midlevel position (MLP) and dangerously relaxing VCPR requirements under the guise of expanding access to care. “We believe that introducing a midlevel position is unnecessary, would be detrimental to the quality of care animals receive, and presents risks for food safety and public health,” Dr. Donlin said. “The addition of a midlevel position would mean someone who is not a veterinarian could be diagnosing, doing surgery, prescribing, and that is very worrisome. It’s also important to understand the concerns on the food animal side. The misdiagnosis or slow diagnosis of a life-threatening public health disease could cost billions of dollars or harm public health, so you’ve got to be careful. “Claims of crisis-level shortages have some legislators in several states considering making dramatic changes to how the profession is regulated, even to the point of comments being made suggesting doing away with licensure altogether.” AVMA’s position is that rather than creating a new, unneeded midlevel position, the profession should increase the number of veterinary technicians, veterinary technologists, and veterinary technician specialists, leverage them to the top of their degrees, and provide the pay and recognition they deserve. Asked about the AVMA’s support for an in-person examination to establish a VCPR, Dr. Donlin responded that, “the AVMA really believes in telemedicine, and has for years,” adding that it is essential to have a previously established in-person VCPR. “We firmly believe that an in-person exam establishing the VCPR is essential because you need to have your hands on and do the physical exam and also have the capability of doing diagnostics if necessary.” Animal owners are not always able to accurately describe the clinical signs they are seeing their animals exhibit. Animals will instinctively hide signs of illness and pain, making a professional evaluation even more important. The in-person examination also allows the veterinarian to obtain appropriate diagnostic specimens. For animals that don’t regularly see a veterinarian, a complete in-person examination is a vital component of basic or preventative veterinary care, Dr. Donlin added. Once a veterinarian has established that in-person relationship with the animal, telemedicine can provide numerous advantages for patients, veterinary teams, and clients throughout the duration of the animal’s care, she said. Direct-to-consumer (DTC) veterinary telemedicine has been on the rise since the pandemic, according to Dr. Donlin. As a result, the AVMA is concerned that some DTC companies appear to be product sales-oriented rather than care-oriented, meaning that their focus is on delivering their preferred set of drugs and medical products instead of comprehensively evaluating patients and delivering best-suited care. Some of these companies are actively pursuing state legislative and regulatory changes that would allow a VCPR to be established electronically. They are lobbying for a virtual VCPR, because, it appears, their business model is only sustainable and more profitable in an operating environment that allows a VCPR to be established electronically, she said. “For all these reasons,” Dr. Donlin said, “the AVMA opposes any legislative efforts to eliminate the need for an in-person visit to establish the VCPR.”
Artificial intelligence in veterinary medicine: What are the ethical and legal implications?, Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning, a type of AI that includes deep learning, which produces data with multiple levels of abstraction, are emerging technologies that have the potential to change how veterinary medicine is practiced. They have been developed to help improve predictive analytics and diagnostic performance, thus supporting decision-making when practitioners analyze medical images. But unlike human medicine, no premarket screening of AI tools is required for veterinary medicine. This raises important ethical and legal considerations, particularly when it comes to conditions with a poor prognosis where such interpretations may lead to a decision to euthanize, and makes it even more vital for the veterinary profession to develop best practices to protect care teams, patients, and clients. That's according to Dr. Eli Cohen, a clinical professor of diagnostic imaging at the North Carolina State College of Veterinary Medicine. He, presented the webinar, " ," which debuted in late August on AVMA Axon, AVMA's digital education platform. During the presentation, he explored the potential of AI to increase efficiency and accuracy throughout radiology, but also acknowledged its biases and risks. The use of AI in clinical diagnostic imaging practice will continue to grow, largely because much of the data—radiographs, ultrasound, CT, MRI, and nuclear medicine—and their corresponding reports are in digital form, according to a . Dr. Ryan Appleby, assistant professor at the University of Guelph Ontario Veterinary College, who authored the paper, said artificial intelligence can be a great help in expediting tasks. For example, AI can be used to automatically rotate or position digital radiographs, produce hanging protocols—which are instructions for how to arrange images for optimal viewing—or call up report templates based on the body parts included in the study. More generally, AI can triage workflows by taking a first pass at various imaging studies and prioritize more critical patients to the top of the queue, said Dr. Appleby, who is chair of the American College of Veterinary Radiology's (ACVR) Artificial Intelligence Committee. That said, when it comes to interpreting radiographs, not only does AI need to identify common cases of a disease, but it must also bring up border cases as well to ensure patients are being treated accurately and for it to be useful. "As a specialist, I'm there for the subset of times when there is something unusual," Dr. Cohen said, who is co-owner of Dragonfly Imaging, a teleradiology company, where he serves as a radiologist. "While AI will get better, it's not perfect. We need to be able to troubleshoot it when it doesn't perform appropriately." Medical device developers must gain Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for their devices and permission to sell their product in the U.S. Artificial intelligence and machine learning-enabled medical devices for humans are classified by the FDA as medical devices. However, companies developing medical devices for animals are not required to undergo a premarket screening, unlike those developing devices for people. The ACVR has expressed concern about the lack of oversight for software used to read radiographs. "It is logical that if the FDA provides guidelines and oversight of medical devices used on people, that similar measures should be in place for veterinary medical devices to help protect our pets," said Dr. Tod Drost, executive director of the American College of Veterinary Radiology. "The goal is not to stifle innovation, but rather have a neutral third party to provide checks and balances to the development of these new technologies." Massive amounts of data are needed to train machine-learning algorithms and training images must be annotated manually. Because of the lack of regulation for AI developers and companies, it's not a requirement for companies to provide information about how their employees trained or validated their products. Many of these algorithms are often referred to as operating in a "black box." "That raises pretty relevant ethical considerations if we're using these to make diagnoses and perform treatments," Dr. Cohen said. Because AI doesn't have a conscience, he said, those who are developing and using AI need to have a conscience and can't afford to be indifferent. "AI might be smart, but that doesn't mean it's ethical," he said. In the case of black-box medicine, "there exists no expert who can provide practitioners with useful causal or mechanistic explanations of the systems' internal decision procedures," . Dr. Cohen says, "As we adopt AI and bring it into veterinary medicine in a prudent and intentional way, the new best practice ideally would be leveraging human expertise and AI together as opposed to replacing humans with AI." He suggested having a domain expert involved in all stages of AI—from product development, validation, and testing to clinical use, error assessment, and oversight of these products. The , including the American College of Radiology and Society for Imaging Informatics in Medicine, is that ethical use of AI in radiology should promote well-being and minimize harm. "It is important that veterinary professionals take an active role in making medicine safer as use of artificial intelligence becomes more common. Veterinarians will hopefully learn the strengths and weaknesses of this new diagnostic tool by reviewing current literature and attending continuing education presentations," Dr. Appleby said. Dr. Cohen recommends veterinarians obtain owner consent before using AI in decision making, particularly if the case involves a consult or referral. And during the decision-making process, practitioners should be vigilant about AI providing a diagnosis that exacerbates human and cognitive biases. "We need to be very sure that when we choose to make that decision, that it is as validated and indicated as possible," Dr. Cohen said. According to a 2022  written by Dr. Cohen, if not carefully overseen, AI has the potential to cause harm. For example, an AI product could produce a false‐positive diagnosis, leading to tests or interventions, or lead to false‐negative results, possibly delaying diagnosis and care. It could also be applied to inappropriate datasets or populations, such as applying an algorithm to an ultrasound on a horse that gathered information from small animal cases. He added that veterinary professionals need to consider if it is ethical to shift responsibility to general practitioners, emergency veterinarians, or non-imaging specialists who use a product whose accuracy is not published or otherwise known. "How do we make sure there is appropriate oversight to protect our colleagues, our patients, and our clients, and make sure we're not asleep at the wheel as we usher in this new tech and adopt it responsibly?" Dr. Cohen asked. The webinar, " ," is available to watch at any time, offers one hour of continuing education credit, and is free for AVMA and Student AVMA members. The cost is $25 for nonmembers.
Conference of Research Workers in Animal Diseases – January 20-24, 2023, The Conference of Research Workers in Animal Diseases (CRWAD) held its annual conference from January 20-24 in Chicago Charles Czuprynski, PhD, Madison, Wisconsin. Czuprynski is a former professor of microbiology and a former chair of the Department of Pathobiological Sciences at the University of Wisconsin-Madison School of Veterinary Medicine. During his tenure, he also directed the veterinary school's Food Research Institute. Bo Wang, PhD, Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, for "Investigation of ribavirin resistance-associated hepatitis E virus mutations using genotype 3 rabbit HEV model"; and Lee Pinnell, PhD, Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi, for "Fusobacteria or Bacteroidetes? Microbial communities in bovine liver abscesses arise from throughout the gut" David Benfield, PhD, The Ohio State University; Carol Chitko-McKown, PhD, U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service; Robert Ellis, PhD, Colorado State University; Dr. Laurel Gershwin, University of California-Davis; Joan Lunney, PhD, Kansas State University; David Renter, PhD, U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service; Dr. Patricia Shewen, University of Guelph; Dr. Subramaniam Srikumaran, Washington State University; and Thomas Wittum, PhD, The Ohio State University : Best overall presentation—Dr. Flavio Cargnin Faccin, University of Georgia, for "Development of a modified live attenuated influenza virus vaccine against H9N2 for poultry"; : First place—Molly McClurg, Texas A&M University, for "Does antimicrobial-free beef production reduce transmission of resistant bacteria to human consumers?"; second place—Chia-Ming Su, University of Illinois, for "Immune outcome of IFN suppression-negative and NF-κB activation-negative PRRSV infection in vitro and in vivo"; and third place—Dr. Taeyong Kwon, Kansas State University, for "Gene editing of pigs to control swine influenza virus infections"; : First place—Mehdi Maury Laouedj, University of Montreal, for "Identification and characterization of nidovirus-host molecular interactions using global proteomic profiling"; : Sachithra Gunasekara, Oklahoma State University, for "Characterization of the neutrophil response to SARS-CoV-2 infection in a feline animal model" : First place—Dr. Leonie Bettin, University of Saskatchewan, for "Kinome analysis reveals age-dependent mechanisms of TLR7/8 induced signaling in porcine gamma-delta T cells;" second place—Camille Holmes, Cornell University, for "Mucosal and systemic secretion of antileukoproteinase during equine inflammation"; third place—B. Tegner Jacobson, Montana State University, for "Impaired alveolar macrophage phagocytosis contributes to bacterial persistence in M. infected sheep"; and fourth place—Beulah Samuel, Iowa State University, for "Trained immunity in bovine innate cell populations followed by subcutaneous BCG administration"; : First place—Dr. Lauren Crawford, Auburn University, for "Characterization and effects of bacterial modified live vaccination on natural killer cell populations in cattle"; and second place—Wenliang He, Texas A&M University, for "Role of glutamate and other crystalline amino acids in diets for the growth of juvenile hybrid striped bass" : Izabela de Assis Rocha, University of Kentucky, for "Pharmacokinetics of Bumped Kinase Inhibitor-1708 in horses: a candidate for EPM treatment" : First place—Lucas Horton, Kansas State University, for "Outcomes affected by metaphylaxis from a clinical trial of feedlot calves at medium risk for respiratory disease"; second place—Colette Nickodem, Texas A&M University, for "Natural and targeted bacteriophage treatments as a pre-harvest mitigation technique in cattle feedlots"; and third place—Christopher Panaretos, Texas A&M University, for "Design of an RNA bait set to enrich genomic DNA in samples of the bovine respiratory tract" : First place—Megan Neveau, Iowa State University, for "Analysis of IAV transmission in large U.S. swine production systems using active surveillance"; and second place—Ilya Slizovskiy, University of Minnesota, for "Showering as a biosecurity intervention to disrupt work-related shifts in swine worker skin microbiomes"; —L. Wang, University of Minnesota, for "Evaluation of an electrostatic precipitator on PRRS virus aerosol removal and inactivation" : First place—Jessica Kincade, The Ohio State University, for "Global epigenomic changes observed postnatally elucidate lifelong defects following fetal BVDV infection"; and second place—Kush Yadav, The Ohio State University, for "Expanding host range and cross species transmission potential of rat hepatitis E virus"; —Siqi Li, University of Illinois, for "Immunogenicity characterization of a multivalent vaccine for porcine post-weaning diarrhea" : Naemi Bickmeier, Kansas State University, for "Pregnancy success among eastern Kansas beef cows infected with Anaplasma marginale and/or Bovine Leukemia Virus" Dr. Annette O'Connor, Michigan State University, ; Dr. Rebecca Wilkes, Purdue University, ; Charles Czuprynski, PhD, University of Wisconsin-Madison, ; Dr. Paul Morley, Texas A&M University, ; and —Weipang Zhang, PhD, University of Illinois; Jun Lin, PhD, University of Tennessee; and Dr. John Angelos, University of California-Davis A version of this story appears in the September 2023 print issue of
Conference on Research Workers in Animal Diseases, 
Foreign animal disease training offered, 
Lobbying for animal disease issues, 
Animal Disease Traceability, 
Animal disease control program supervision, All animal disease control and eradication programs should be under the direction and supervision of veterinarians.
Conference of Research Workers in Animal Diseases - Dec. 3-7, 2021, Annual conference, Dec. 3-7, 2021, Chicago Dr. M.M. Chengappa, Manhattan, Kansas. A 1970 graduate of what was known as the University of Agricultural Sciences’ Veterinary College Bangalore in India, Dr. Chengappa is a professor in the Department of Diagnostic Medicine/Pathobiology at Kansas State University College of Veterinary Medicine. He is a diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Microbiologists and immediate past president of CRWAD. Dr. Chengappa helped organize a virtual CRWAD conference in 2020 and a hybrid conference in 2021. C. Joaquin Caceres, PhD, University of Georgia, for “Development of a novel live attenuated influenza A virus vaccine encoding the IgA-inducing protein”; and Dr. Igor Paploski, University of Minnesota, for “Multi-strain dynamics of PRRSV type-2 in U.S. pig populations” CRWAD named inaugural fellows with research careers in academia, industry, and government. These individuals were recognized for the impact and importance of their work; their ability to communicate and interpret science to stakeholders and the public; their contributions to scientific literature reflecting fundamental discoveries and innovative applied research in animal health and disease, population health, and translational medicine; and their mentoring of young research scientists. The fellows are Cynthia L Baldwin, PhD, University of Massachusetts; Dr. Yung-Fu Chang, Cornell University; Dr. Norman F. Cheville, Iowa State University; Dr. Lynette Bundy Corbeil, University of California; Roy Curtiss III, PhD, University of Florida; William C. Davis, PhD, Washington State University; Roman Reddy Ganta, PhD, Kansas State University; Dr. Ian A. Gardner, University of Prince Edward Island; Dr. Laura L. Hungerford, Virginia Tech; Jun Lin, PhD, University of Tennessee; Dr. T.G. Nagaraja, Kansas State University; Dr. Stuart W.J. Reid, University of London; Dr. Richard F. Ross, Iowa State University; Linda J. Saif, PhD, The Ohio State University; Dr. Y.M. Saif, The Ohio State University; Dr. Jan M. Sargeant, University of Guelph; and Lorraine M. Sordillo-Gandy, PhD, Michigan State University. : Best overall presentation—Kristina Ceres, Cornell University, for “A critical evaluation of pangenomics, with reference to its utility in outbreak investigation”; : First place—Taylor Brooke McAtee, West Texas A&M University, for “ Do modified–live virus respiratory vaccines influence the respiratory microbiome of cattle?”; second place—Taylor Heckman, University of California-Davis, for “Antigenic profiling of genetic groups affecting cultured fish in the United States”; and third place—Chong Li, University of Minnesota, for “Shedding dynamics, genetic variation, and reassortment of heterosubtypic influenza secondary infection in pigs”; : First place—Prabha Bista, Purdue University, for “P110—outer membrane proteins as potential vaccine candidates against infections” : First place—Elisabeth Larson, Cornell University, for “Peripheral IgE+ plasmablasts secrete IgE and correlate to allergic disease severity”; second place—Jayne Wiarda, Iowa State University, for “Porcine innate lymphoid and T cells differ from circulating populations—novel findings via single-cell RNAseq”; and third place—Darling Melany Madrid, University of Florida, for “Combination of antiviral therapies in the control of influenza infection in pigs”; : First place—Alisa Herbst, University of Kentucky, for “Pro-inflammatory cytokine responses to bacteria antigen LPS differ between young adult and old horses in vitro”; second place—Camille Holmes, Cornell University, for “Identification of antileukoproteinase as a marker for the immune status of horses during equine herpesvirus type 1 infection”; and third place—B. Tegner Jacobson, Montana State University, for “Impact of on the phagocytic ability of alveolar macrophages” : Heather Kopsco, University of Illinois for “An analysis of companion animal tick encounters as revealed by photograph-based crowdsourced data” : First place—Dr. Benjamin Blair, University of Illinois, for “The application of artificial intelligence to detect disease outbreaks in swine farms”; second place—Rodrigo Campos, University of Georgia, for “Dynamics of bovine tuberculosis outbreaks: a study of interdependence between seasonal host movement and pathogen abundance”; and third place—Dr. Christopher Kellogg, Michigan State University, for “Changes in bovine leukemia virus diagnostic parameters in naturally infected dairy cattle over a lactation cycle” : First place—Betsy Armenta-Leyva, Iowa State University, for “Detection of antibody in processing fluids using a commercial serum ELISA”; and second place—Catherine Belanger, University of Guelph, for “Examining the canine infectious disease risks associated with importing dogs from Asia into Canada”; —Jerusha Matthews, Kansas State University, for “Seroprevalence of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus infections in humans and livestock in West Africa” : First place—Huiwen Wang, The University of Tennessee, for “Enterobactin-based immune interventions against Gram-negative bacterial infections in chickens”; and second place—Rachel Soltys, Washington State University, for “ Kentucky ST152 and ST198 genetic lineages show lineage-specific metabolic phenotypes”; —Kush Yadav, The Ohio State University, for “Ribosomal protein sequence 17 (RPS17) insertion increases avian hepatitis E virus (aHEV) replication” : Anne Lovett, Kansas State University, for “Acute anaplasmosis reduces breeding soundness in experimentally-infected beef bulls” Charles Czuprynski, University of Wisconsin-Madison, ; Dr. Annette O’Connor, Michigan State University, ; Dr. M.M. Chengappa, Kansas State University, ; Dr. Paul Morley, Texas A&M University and West Texas A&M University, ; and —Dr. Rebecca Wilkes, Purdue University; Weipang Zhang, PhD, University of Illinois; Dr. Marcus Kehrli, U.S. Department of Agriculture (retired); and Dr. John Angelos, University of California-Davis A version of this article appears in the July 2022 print issue of .
Disinfectants for foreign and emerging animal diseases, The AVMA strongly advocates for and supports maintaining for the use of disinfectants against foreign and emerging animal diseases where science demonstrates that they are effective and safe for the applications. Furthermore, the AVMA encourages emergency planners, veterinarians, and producers to incorporate such products in accordance with their exemption labels into foreign animal disease response plans. AVMA encourages monitoring for pathogen resistance to disinfectants, and for the development of concurrent antimicrobial resistance. Veterinarians are encouraged to utilize strategies that maximize the effect of disinfectants on pathogens, while seeking to minimize the chances of developing resistance within microbes.
World Rabies Day: ‘All for 1, One Health for All’, September 28 marks the 17th annual World Rabies Day, an event meant to raise awareness and advocate for the elimination of human deaths from dog-mediated rabies worldwide. This year’s theme is “All for 1, One Health for All,” highlighting that One Health is for everyone, not a select few, according to World Rabies Day coordinator Global Alliance for Rabies Control (GARC). Following the success from the 2022 World Rabies Day theme, “Rabies: One Health, Zero Deaths,” this year’s theme remains focused on One Health, the nonprofit organization explained on its website. “This year’s theme adds the additional layer of highlighting the need for collaboration, the importance of equality, and strengthening overall health systems by ensuring that One Health is not for a select few but is rather something that should be available to everyone,” . In keeping with this year’s “All for 1, One Health for All” theme, the GARC suggests celebrating World Rabies Day with a canine vaccination campaign, educational initiatives, improving or undertaking laboratory diagnosis, capturing or reporting rabies data, partnering with others, or advocating for its elimination. Individuals and organizations can register their own . World Rabies Day is observed by the United Nations and endorsed by the World Health Organization (WHO), World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH), U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the AVMA, among others. The day of the annual event is the anniversary of the death of Louis Pasteur, who worked in collaboration to develop the first human rabies vaccine. According to the WHO, rabies causes 59,000 human deaths annually in over 150 countries, with 95% of cases occurring in Africa and Asia. This number is likely a gross underestimate, however, because of underreporting and uncertain estimates, the WHO states, adding that the burden of disease is disproportionally borne by rural poor populations, with approximately half of cases attributable to children under 15 years of age. Unvaccinated dogs are the main source of human rabies deaths, contributing up to 99% of all rabies transmissions to humans globally. The AVMA, Federation of Veterinarians of Europe (FVE), and Canadian VMA (CVMA) adopted the “ ” in 2015. According to the joint position on the global control of rabies in dogs, “The AVMA, CVMA, and FVE recognize that canine rabies presents a serious public health risk worldwide.” Also according to the position, “The veterinary profession is uniquely poised to play a leading role in controlling and eradicating canine rabies.” The number of animal rabies cases reported in the United States decreased significantly during 2021, according to the CDC’s annual rabies surveillance report, “ ,” published in the July 2023 issue of . During 2021, 54 U.S. jurisdictions reported 3,663 rabid animals, representing an 18.2% decrease from the 4,479 cases reported in 2020, the report states. Of the total reported rabid animals, 3,352 (91.5%) involved wildlife, with bats (33.9%), raccoons (28.1%), skunks (18.9%), and foxes (8.6%) representing the primary hosts confirmed with rabies. Rabid cats (5.9%), cattle (1.1%), and dogs (1%) accounted for 94% of rabies cases involving domestic animals in 2021. Five human rabies deaths were reported in 2021, the report notes.
The VCPR: Why it needs to be established in person, As telemedicine appointments become more common in veterinary medicine, some states are moving toward allowing the veterinarian-client-patient relationship (VCPR) to be established  virtually, without a previous in-person examination of the animal or visit to the premises where the animals are kept. The AVMA opposes a VCPR being established virtually because it creates serious risks for patient health and safety. Simply put, establishing the VCPR with an in-person, hands-on examination is in the best interest of animals and is fundamental to quality care. The veterinary profession has been using telemedicine successfully for a very long time, Diagnosing and treating an animal without previously having had an in-person visit is dangerous for animals’ health and welfare. The initial in-person examination provides veterinarians with crucial information about both the animal and the owner. During a physical examination, the veterinarian uses sight, sound, touch, and smell to gather information about the animal’s physical condition. An in-person visit also allows the veterinarian to run any necessary diagnostic tests. Plus, the veterinarian learns about what the animal owner is comfortable doing with and for the animal. All of this information is and an effective treatment plan. While the owner’s observations are an important piece of information for the veterinarian, they can be incomplete or inaccurate. Owners also may miss signs of disease, for example believing some signs like bad breath or smelly skin/ears to be normal. Without that in-person encounter, there’s a greater chance of a wrong or delayed diagnosis and/or a treatment plan that the owner can’t actually follow. This is particularly dangerous in patients with atypical or nonspecific signs, where only a hands-on physical exam and/or diagnostic tests may reveal a medical emergency—for example, a severely distended bladder, enlarged uterus, or gastrointestinal obstruction. Imagine this scenario: A cat’s owner sees that it is lethargic and has a reduced appetite, but has seen no signs of pain (which cats are so good at hiding!) and doesn’t realize the cat swallowed some string. Without an in-person exam, the veterinarian can ask questions to get a better idea of what’s going on, but the true cause might be overlooked. A hands-on exam might reveal a string wrapped around the base of the tongue, abdominal pain, and bunching of the intestines, prompting X-rays that show the classic “string-of-pearls” appearance to the intestines that can come from swallowed string. The in-person exam enables an accurate, quick diagnosis—potentially saving this cat’s life. Another high-risk scenario involves any animal with a highly infectious disease like canine distemper or African swine fever, or a disease that threatens public health, such as rabies. Here, a missed or delayed diagnosis could have devastating, potentially large-scale consequences for other animals and people. One of the claims in support of allowing a VCPR to be established virtually is that doing so will improve animals’ access to care—that more animals will be seen by veterinarians. But there’s no evidence that this is the case. In reality, animals that aren’t already getting regular preventive care are the ones most likely to have conditions that require an in-person exam to diagnose and treat. As AVMA’s president, Dr. Rena Carlson, said recently in an : “Let’s be realistic. Often, when people talk about access to care, their thoughts go to basic care. The basic care most animals need is preventive care tailored to an animal’s specific circumstances. That requires an in-person visit. “Unfortunately, animals that don’t regularly see a veterinarian are highly likely to need care that requires a complete physical examination to diagnose and treat. A wrong diagnosis or inappropriate treatment plan do not improve access to care. Instead, delays in diagnosis and effective treatment result in prolonged illness and suffering, and they cost the animal’s owner more.” Proper use of telemedicine can improve effectiveness and efficiency in delivering veterinary care. It can help elevate patient care, provide convenience to owners, and benefit veterinary teams and practices. That’s why the AVMA that empower veterinary practices to implement telemedicine. But telemedicine alone cannot replace an in-person examination. Establishing the VCPR in person gives the veterinarian important information about the animal’s physical condition and allows the veterinarian to obtain appropriate diagnostic specimens.  And it provides the basis for a strong, collaborative relationship between the owner and the veterinary team. In the past year, the AVMA has vigorously opposed legislative efforts to remove or relax the in-person VCPR requirement in numerous states. We will continue to do so. Forgoing the initial in-person examination puts the health and safety of animals at risk, as well as public health, and will increase the cost of care when animals receive a wrong diagnosis and treatment plan. No one cares more about animals’ health and welfare than the AVMA and the more than 100,000 AVMA  member veterinarians who have taken an oath to serve them. This is why we are committed to the in-person VCPR.
Federal complex to expand animal disease studies, diagnostics, A laboratory complex under construction near Manhattan, Kansas, will help federal animal health officials study more diseases and expand existing programs. Dr. Kenneth R. Burton, coordinator of the National Bio- and Agro-Defense Facility, said COVID-19 delayed some progress on opening the $1.25 billion facility, but it still should be completed within the next two years. The Department of Agriculture and Department of Homeland Security started construction of the facility in 2015. It replaces the Plum Island Animal Disease Center, in Suffolk County, New York, which became the nation’s primary laboratory for foreign animal diseases in 1954. Dr. Burton talked with News about progress on the facility and how he expects it will benefit animal health. The following interview has been edited for length and clarity. Originally, our timeline was set for substantial completion on Dec. 10, 2020. And substantial completion is basically the time when construction was completed and the facility would be turned over to USDA, by DHS, for ownership and operations. Several months ago, the DHS Science and Technology Directorate notified us that they were predicting a 2 1/2-month delay in substantial completion because of the COVID-19 pandemic. At this point, we’re working with DHS to mitigate challenges associated with that potential delay. Things are moving forward on schedule for USDA as far as operational stand-up, but we’re working with DHS to identify exactly when substantial completion will occur and how soon we can begin phasing the USDA workforce into NBAF. I don’t have a solid date for you right now, but, again, we’re still working with that 2 1/2-month predicted delay, so it should be sometime in fiscal year 2021. [After the interview, the USDA announced plans for substantial completion of construction by October 2021.] We’re scheduled to reach full operational capability by the end of 2022. What that means is that we have all of the certifications in place so we can work with pathogens that are going to be researched in NBAF. And then our end goal is that we’d like to have all of the programs transferred off of Plum Island by the end of 2023. One of the things that we always try to emphasize is the fact that Plum Island itself has such a rich tradition of excellent science, research, training, and diagnostics over its 65-year history that to replace Plum Island is probably a misnomer. We’re looking to expand on programs and the rich tradition of science that researchers at Plum Island have established. Because of its size and the new technology—and the expansion beyond Plum Island’s programs—the NBAF is going to really increase the capabilities for the United States on researching transboundary animal livestock diseases, training, and diagnostics. Currently at Plum Island, the USDA scientific teams focus on foot-and-mouth disease, classical swine fever, and African swine fever. When we move those programs to NBAF in Manhattan, they’ll be able to expand the biosafety level 3 agriculture research to also include Japanese encephalitis and Rift Valley fever at the BSL-3 ag level. Plum Island currently does not have the capability to do livestock research at the highest level of containment—or biosafety level 4. As a matter of fact, there’s only four other facilities in the world that are capable of doing that type of research, and NBAF will be the fifth. We’ll be able to do work on diseases like Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever. We’ll be able to do work on Nipah virus. Many of those diseases are zoonotic diseases that have the potential to affect humans. And so that opens up a whole new level of research. The other part of it is training and diagnostics. Currently, there’s the foreign animal disease diagnostician course at Plum Island that trains state and federal veterinarians to be able to identify many of these transboundary animal diseases in the field. A lot of transboundary animal diseases look very similar to domestic diseases that we see in livestock, and the only way you can differentiate many of those is through a diagnostic platform. So we’ll be able to train more veterinarians at NBAF so we’ve got more veterinarians who are able to recognize some of these diseases. And diagnostic capabilities are going to be expanded. Currently, we have the Foreign Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory at Plum Island, which is a reference laboratory for the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE), the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization, and our National Animal Health Laboratory Network, which is a network of about 60 diagnostic laboratories across the nation that focus on animal health diagnostics. So we’ll be a real integral part of all of those missions and expand a lot of the work that’s being done there. The other thing I might mention: We’ll have what’s called a biologics development module. It’s a unique opportunity to take the science that occurs in the laboratories at NBAF and bring it out of the laboratories to the private sector—to the pharmaceutical industry, to the animal health industry. And it will have proof-of-concept, small-scale production facility capability. They’ll be able to take the science, look at what it takes to produce some of these vaccines and diagnostic platforms, and do some small-scale ‘lessons learned’ or identify some of the challenges that they might encounter. Finally, the North American Foot and Mouth Disease Vaccine Bank and the newly funded National Animal Vaccine and Veterinary Countermeasures Bank oversight will also be managed from NBAF as critical assets to our mission. The facility is actually currently owned and operated by the Department of Homeland Security, so they will be responsible for decommissioning the facility. And I don’t have the specifics of what goes on after that. But my understanding is that the facility, the island, and everything—once it’s decommissioned—will be put up for sale.
The growing importance of aquatic animal diseases, 
Training in foreign and emerging animal diseases, To protect public health, animal health, and food production, it is essential that all veterinarians are adequately prepared to recognize foreign animal diseases, emerging or reemerging diseases, or animal disease resulting from an act of bioterrorism. Veterinarians need to know when to notify authorities of disease outbreaks, whom to notify, and what personal protective actions and biosecurity steps to take. The AVMA recognizes the importance of and encourages all veterinarians' participation in training programs and continuing education courses that will enable the veterinary profession to be adequately prepared to meet these challenges.
Resolutions address random-source animals, swine disease, 
Rabbit hemorrhagic disease’s spread appears to be slowing, Updated July 13, 2023 Since the latest strain of (RHDV-2) was first detected more than three years ago, it continues to spread in North American wild rabbit and hare populations, but reports of detections are greatly reduced. An outbreak of the highly infectious and lethal virus that affects lagomorphs was first confirmed in late March and early April of 2020 in New Mexico in domestic rabbits and wild rabbits and hares. Since then, it’s been identified in domestic and wild species in 28 U.S. states, 19 Mexican states, and four Canadian provinces. In California, RHDV-2 spread widely across several southern counties between 2020 and 2021. More recently, detections of RHDV-2 in domestic rabbits have become infrequent, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), with the last detection occurring earlier this year. Increased awareness, biosecurity, and vaccination are proving to be effective in limiting the spread of RHDV-2 in domestic rabbits, an APHIS spokesperson said. Only one case of RHDV-2 in domestic rabbits occurred between April and June in Sacramento County, according to a . Fifteen cases of RHDV-2 in 12 counties among Colorado, Kansas, Montana, New Mexico, and Texas were recorded during the same timeframe among wild species. The California Department of Food & Agriculture (CDFA) noted that the virus was also detected in domestic rabbits in Sacramento County on February 28 and in a wild jackrabbit in Santa Clara County on February 8. It was previously detected in a wild jackrabbit in Sacramento County in December 2022. Dr. Andrea Mikolon, assistant branch chief of the Animal Health Branch at CDFA attributed the reduction in cases in domestic rabbits to both the decrease in the virus spreading in the wild population, “and also some help from the vaccination of the rabbits with the European vaccines previously and now the Medgene vaccine.” In fall 2021, Medgene Labs received emergency use authorization from the APHIS’s Center for Veterinary Biologics (CVB) for its RHDV-2 vaccine. The vaccine is now available in 45 states and the District of Columbia. Dr. Mikolon explained that in California, endangered riparian brush rabbits are the only wild rabbits authorized to be vaccinated. While there seems to be a decrease in the virus in wild populations, it’s likely not because of the vaccine as only a small number of wild rabbits were vaccinated and in such a small area of the state. Dr. Mikolon said veterinarians should still include RHDV-2 in a differential diagnosis for sudden death. “We’re hoping that it’s going away but we can’t be sure,” she said. The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) has seen RHDV-2 move from previous 2020 endemic areas such as West Texas and the North Texas Panhandle to more eastern areas with two potential cases on the eastern border that are still being investigated. Dr. Sara Wyckoff, a wildlife veterinarian at TPWD, noted that the confirmed wild rabbit RHDV-2 detections in the central part of the state are currently the most eastward detections of RHDV-2 in wild rabbits in the United States. “As of right now, we have 16 counties with positive RHDV-2 samples and two pending counties since this current 2022 outbreak started,” Dr. Wyckoff said. RHDV-2 is the first disease that veterinarians in the U.S. actively vaccinate pet rabbits against. The virus can be transmitted through direct or indirect contact. It has a mortality rate ranging from . Exposed rabbits that survive may become carriers of the virus. APHIS encourages veterinarians nationwide to watch for RHDV-2, report any suspicious illnesses or deaths to state and federal regulators, and submit samples for testing through the National Veterinary Services Laboratories’ (NVSL) Foreign Animal Disease Diagnostic Laboratory (FADDL). There are currently no licensed vaccine candidates for RHDV-2 outside of emergency use. for more vaccines. The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) provides epidemiologic assessments of animal health issues, including (RHDV-2).
Groups create resource on readiness for foreign animal disease, The American Association of Bovine Practitioners and the Academy of Veterinary Consultants, both of which count bovine veterinarians among their members, have developed a set of guidelines to protect veterinary businesses in the event of an outbreak of a foreign animal disease in livestock. The document is meant to provide guidance for veterinary practices that are not within disease control areas to maintain essential public and private veterinary services throughout an FAD emergency while implementing and maintaining biosecurity protocols to mitigate potential disease spread. An FAD emergency, such as an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease or African swine fever, is a worldwide concern. If introduced into the United States, FMD could have major animal health and welfare impacts--untold numbers of animals would suffer from its ill effects. In addition, there would be devastating effects on trade and global economics. According to the (PDF), various factors influence the management of foreign animal disease, including increased international travel, evolving infectious agents, trade agreements, and the uncertain impact of biotechnology. The guidelines help veterinarians apply biosecurity measures, safeguard their clinics, answer common client questions, maintain continuity of business, and access additional information during an outbreak. For example, the AABP-AVC guidelines suggest a 72-hour movement standstill following the first U.S. diagnosis of a foreign animal disease. In the early stages of an outbreak, extra caution is needed by everyone visiting businesses with livestock, especially veterinarians performing farm calls. Allocation of resources during an outbreak will likely prioritize the infected premises, and practices that are not within a disease control area will need to maintain essential veterinary services while also mitigating potential disease spread. Practitioners should identify their state animal health official and USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service area veterinarian in charge or veterinary medical officer prior to an FAD emergency. State and federal animal health officials will be responsible for communicating disease control actions including stopping movement of animals and animal products, quarantine, test administration and analysis, and animal depopulation and disposal. The guidelines also indicate that before an outbreak occurs, veterinarians could encourage all livestock clients to keep a log of who is on their farm and when, that way they can refer to records for easier tracking of disease. The guidelines are available for download on the (PDF).
